delivery is quick
every minute counts
[Music]
mother and calf must form a lasting bond
based on
smell taste and sight it's
this relationship that will sustain them
on the long journey that lies ahead
this is his most vulnerable time
hyenas they may commute the distance of
two marathons to get here
but for such easy pickings the rewards
are worth it
[Music]
vulnerable newborns are just what
they're looking for
other antelopes hide their young away
but wildebeest calves
must be ready to follow their mother
from birth
he has just minutes to find his feet
hyenas prefer the easy option
and prey doesn't come much easier than
[Music]
this
to survive the calf must master in
minutes
what a human baby takes a year to learn
[Music]
hyenas separate as they move through the
herds
in this way they cover more ground
they hunt with both sight and sense of
[Music]
smell
the calf learns to use his legs faster
than any other mammal
he's up and walking in under four
minutes
it's not a moment too soon
he faces his first deadly challenge
[Music]
so
he's already proving his strength few
calves can outrun a hyena
on their first day
as they mature young males begin to
explore the boundaries
of the pride's territory
red has ventured out alone
[Music]
and london straight into the middle of
the hyena clan
[Music]
he's trapped by over 20 of them
the pack tries to wear him down
this number of hyenas could kill him
[Music]
it's impossible to fight them all at
once
[Music]
he can't keep them at bay for much
longer
he's towering fast
this ally tattoo has heard the commotion
[Music]
now the odds have changed
even for 20 hyenas a pair of male lions
is too much to take on
[Music]
red is lucky
adult males within hyena societies are
below
every other female this three-week-old
female
cub will be more dominant than even a 20
year old hyena
male that's part of this clan i knew
male hyenas had it tough
but i didn't realize it was quite that
tough on them i kind of feel sorry for
them
it's hard to believe a helpless newborn
cub
outranks even the oldest male in the
clan
with a ranking system like this finding
a mate can't be easy for the males
[Music]
to try and understand more about the
relationship between males and females
i'm joining axel on one of his nighttime
research trips
wild hyenas are notoriously difficult to
observe
so we're going to draw them in with
sound
so what we are setting up right now is
something called a call up
and using these speakers in a wee laptop
we have we've got recordings of
lions and hyenas at kill sites we play
these
at dusk and hopefully that will attract
some hyenas to the carcass that we've
placed
uh under that tree over there we just
sit completely still
and there's absolutely no chance of them
coming to us because that's where the
sound's coming from
we'll kill the sound as soon as we see
them okay i trust you
i think i'm in your hands so let's do
this let's do this
awesome let's go i'm excited and a
little bit afraid right now
the sound of a rival clan calling will
be the first thing
to attract their attention
combined with their powerful sense of
smell the call
up could entice hyenas from as far as 10
kilometers away
this yeah after just 20 minutes the clan
begins to close in looks like three sets
of eyes
just
the females are the first to arrive on
the scene
and leading the way is ursula
[Music]
what's unusual about hyenas is that the
females get to eat
before the males axel suspects that any
males in the area
will be keeping their distance for now
one of the first rules the males have to
learn is never come between a lady
and her lunch i never thought i'd say
this but
hearing bones crunching underneath them
incredibly powerful jewels of hyenas
is a pretty cool sound go figure
an hour passes before another solitary
hyena
emerges
is this the male here yes so this
individual right here
he was the last one of all the hyenas to
come in yeah
you can see he's been very submissive
bowing his head every time females go by
laying very low why is it that
the males are so incredibly timid and
hesitant
around female hyenas what's that about
anatomically
much smaller than females they tend to
be lighter in weight
minor in build and females tend to be
much more masculine much more muscular
they definitely have the weight
and the ability to overpower and
dominate males
as the heat of the day wanes animals
become more active
after sunset there's a drop in
temperature of about 10 degrees
and that's a cue for the night hunters
to venture out in search of a meal
when the night filming crew arrived on
the scene of the buffalo kill found
earlier
the lion pride male had shown up he's
the only mature male in the group
he's about seven years old and has been
fitted with a radio collar
by the zambian carnivore program
he's a big cat probably over 200 kilos
and one of his most important roles is
to defend the pride and territory
against competitors
hyenas are top of the list when it comes
to a lion's enemies
a large clan of hyena have been
attracted by the scent of the buffalo
kill
[Music]
all the adult lions including the
females do their best to keep these
would-be thieves at bay
here the thermal cameras show one of the
pride lionesses chasing off a lone hyena
then suddenly the pride male catches one
of the hyenas off guard
and stamps his authority in brutal
[Music]
fashion
with the breaking dawn all but one of
the hyenas has retreated
but even the injured individual won't
give up
amazing dramas here there's absolutely
no love lost between these two
eternal adversaries
and still the hyena lives
and i'd love to be able to tell you that
the reason for her lion
attacking a hyena is simply to defend
its meal but you know what
truth is lions are pretty brutish and
they will try and grab and kill
just about anything whether it's a
predator or otherwise
if it doesn't represent a meal they just
leave it
if it does of course they eat it but in
that way
in a pretty violent fashion
they absolutely are top of the tree when
it comes to the predators out here
[Music]
beggars belief doesn't it how can an
animal
survive being suffocated effectively by
a male lion
and still be breathing not just
breathing
but have the will to live
that is so keen that it gets up and it
goes
only a hyena only a hyena
you may not think they're beautiful but
my goodness you've got to respect them
you've got to
[Music]
you